Once around, Trappist one. So, Trappist
one is a star that lies in the
constellation of Aquarius.
It's very, very dim. Magnitude 18.8, way
beyond the capacity of most uh amateur
telescopes, in fact. And the reason for
that is actually the power of the star
is very low. It only puts out 12,000th
of the energy that our sun does. This is
a very dim, very faint star indeed. And
it's very close to the blue line which
is the ecliptic, the path of the
projection of the sun onto the night sky
as the earth orbits around roughly the
plane in which we find all the planets
of our solar system with the solar
system being basically a flat disc and
the position of trappist one marked by
that red circle of course discovered in
1999 by John Gizish and his team who
were doing a survey
of ultra cool red dwarf stars using the
Lassilla telescope in Chile. And this
star is so faint um as described that it
doesn't appear in most cataloges. So
this doesn't have another catalog
designation.
Trappist as in Trappist one. Well,
that's an acronym standing for the
transiting planets and planetismals
small telescope. Very contrived indeed.
You have to have a good acronym in
astronomy it seems. And this is in fact
two telescopes, both 24in reflecting
telescopes,
600 mm, one in Chile, one in Morocco.
And it was the one in Chile that was
being used for this particular
discovery. And it was looking for the
dip in the light caused by a planet
transiting across the face of the star,
blocking out some of the starlight. you
see a slight dip. Now, we've worked out
that this star is one of the sun's near
neighbors, 40.6 light years away, using
the usual methods of parallax. And the
uh well, we wouldn't have discovered it
if it was any further away. It's so
faint. It's an M8 class red dwarf. These
letter and number categories we go OB AF
G KM
through the order of decreasing
temperature from the blue hot stars at
the O end through the white and yellow
stars in the middle and the orange and
red stars K and M. So if it's M, it's
red. But that doesn't necessarily mean
it's a small star. You can have red
giants and they will also be class M.
The number after the letter is a
subdivision within the class. Uh so M is
the hottest and uh M9 would be the
faintest within the
red category and so forth. So our sun I
think is G2. This one's an M8, which
puts it right at the far end of the cool
side of the red dwarfs. An M9 would be
the extreme case. And the reason this is
so uh faint and cool is because it's
just 9% of the mass of our sun. Only
just large enough to be a proper star.
Uh the ultimate would be around 7.5.
That's percent of the mass of the sun.
That would be the lower limit for a
proper star. And such a star would be an
M9.
Um, in fact, in radius, it's only just
larger than Jupiter, a little bit
larger. The uh mass comes to give it a
much more dense core in the center and
just a slightly larger volume.
Now, I said it was cool. The temperature
just 2566
Kelvin. So, that's very cold indeed. We
we tend to reckon that 3,000 corresponds
to uh a sort of red hot object. Uh so
this is nearly 500° cooler than that.
And because it's cooler, you can
actually have molecules persisting in
the outer layer of the star, the
photosphere, things like carbon
monoxide, water, and so forth. And you
can see those in the spectrum of the
star.
But most of the energy, most of the
electromagnetic radiation coming from
the star is in the form of infrared. The
uh peak in the spectrum is so far
shifted down to the longer wavelength
end that only a tiny fraction of the
light comes out as visible. That's
really why it's so uh faint to our eyes
and looking through telescopes. And uh
an infrared telescope is definitely the
way to go in terms of studying this.
It's older than the sun, 7.6 billion
years. So, three billion years older
than the sun. But there's an important
fact about uh such very small stars is
that they spend a long time in their
protostar phase, their pre- main
sequence phase before they eventually
reorganize themselves and get hot enough
and dense enough in the core to kick off
nuclear fusion. And that for such a
small star can last around two billion
years. For the star like the sun, it
probably only takes a 100 million years,
something like that. So much, much more
rapid. But then with a larger star like
the sun, everything is more rapid. The
sun's going to live around 10 billion
years in total and is about halfway
through. Trappist one, well, a thousand
times longer, 10 trillion years. And so
that's 7.6 6 billion is a tiny fraction.
In terms of what attracted everyone's
attention, it was when they saw the
light curve, the plot of the amount of
light coming from the star over time
running horizontally. You can see 1.0 is
the typical uh slightly noisy band of
star activity. And then there are a
pattern of significant sudden drops in
the light. And analysis of those shows
that equally deep drops occur with equal
frequency. And the first two here, 1B
and 1 C, are labeled up for you. You can
see that pattern has been identified.
They were the first of two planets to be
discovered in 2016. And then the
following year, five more. And we have
the dips in high resolution for all of
those planets, uh, B, C, D, E, and H.
And you can see the the dips. They're
quite a small percentage of the overall
light. So these are small planets.
You can see the periods of the orbits
there from one and a half days for
Trappist 1b, 2.4 for the next one, and
so on. And the the last one there is
labeled 14 to 25 on that particular
graph. Uh we now know the answer is just
under 19 in fact in the middle of that
range that was given. But these high
resolution plots tell you quite a lot.
You can see they get wider as you go
down. That's because the planet is
orbiting more slowly and therefore takes
longer to cross the disc of the star.
You can see that the steepness of the
shoulder of the dip gradually flattens
out again representing the speed with
which the the planet crosses the edge of
the star. But it also tells you a little
bit about the size of the planet. Um and
you can work that out in various ways.
uh obviously just a matter of using the
uh formula pi r squar for the surface
area of the disc of the planet and the
star and the amount of light that's been
blocked in the middle and you can do
other calculations along the same lines
and work out quite a lot from this sort
of information. So we have quite an
amazing data table on these planets
ranging as I said from one and a half
days orbit at just 1% or so of the
distance between the sun and the earth
the astronomical unit going out to
planet age with an 18.76
day orbit at 6% of an AU. You can see
the radius of the planet and the masses
of the planets and uh well they're all
fairly similar to uh the radius of Earth
and similar in mass
couple of them there just down to a
third the mass of the Earth
and their densities. Well, we can see
those and their surface gravity. We'll
have a look at them individually. It
will be more interesting that way. In
terms of their orbits, this is a tiny
system. It's um a little bit larger than
the orbits of the moons of Jupiter
around Jupiter, but it's a lot smaller
than even the orbit of Mercury. There is
a sort of inset plot that you can look
at showing B through H all fitting in a
tiny ring around uh where this the uh
orbit of Mercury would be much much
larger. Perhaps this shows it again.
We've got the inner solar system marked
out with its habitable zone with Venus
on the inside edge of that, Earth in the
middle, Mars on the outside edge, that
green zone. And in the plot at the top,
you can see enlarged 25 times the
Trappist one system. And those E, F, and
G planets are very interesting because
they're in the habitable zone in their
system. D also perhaps because it's just
on the inner edge and it's a rather
smaller planet and the planet size
should be taken into consideration as
well. Another way of plotting this is to
look at the amount of heat coming from
the star and we've got that along the
horizontal axis. So you've got hot at
the left and cold at the right and you
can see that the planets are lined up in
order from the star BCD E FGH.
The size of the disc shows you their
size. Their vertical position shows you
the density of the planets and the
dotted lines are for comparison with the
Earth, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and our
Moon.
And so the ones that are nearest to the
Earth's conditions are definitely D and
E here. D a little bit more
illumination, a little bit smaller
planet. E a little bit less illumination
and uh again slightly smaller. And then
we have the slightly larger F and G
planets that are getting less heat. So
let's have a look at them individually,
work our way through. So, Trappist 1b
137% the mass and just uh 1.12 times the
Earth's radius. Rocky planet 4 g per
cubic cm. Um the innermost of the
planets getting four times the heat
energy. And the James Web Space
Telescope was able to measure the
surface temperature of planet B at 500
Kelvin. So that's pretty warm indeed.
that's well over 200° centigrade. Um,
and so it's going to be far too hot.
Also, being so close in to the star,
it's likely that this is suffering a
degree of the same effect that Io
suffers, the moon of Jupiter, the tidal
squeezing effect, causing it to heat
itself up from inside out. And so this
is likely to be an extremely volcanic
place indeed. Um and thoroughly nasty.
Trappist 1C moving out again just a
little bigger than the Earth likely to
be rocky 5 g per cubic cm. The heat well
that's double the heat energy that Earth
receives. We think it's got a carbon
dioxide atmosphere and again that's
going to boost the temperature and James
Webb measured that as 380 Kelvin. So
around 100° centigrade and so this is uh
certainly boiling hot too hot for liquid
water in all probability.
Moving out to D, things get interesting.
This is 40% the mass of the Earth. Um,
and a little bit less dense, but still
rocky. 4.3 grams per cubic cm, but it
gets almost the exact same amount of
heat energy that the Earth does. 104% to
be precise. And of that radiant uh
energy coming, only 1% is in the visible
light band. That's fascinating. So, this
might be a warm planet on the inner edge
of the habitable zone. Um, but it's
going to be pretty dim.
Trappist 1E slightly smaller than the
Earth. Again, rocky, 4.9 g per cubic cm.
Gravity just 8/10 that of the Earth.
Heat 60% of the heat flow coming to it
from the star. So the temperature there
with a little bit of a boost from any
atmosphere is very very likely to put
this in a condition where it can have
liquid water pooling and forming oceans
on the surface and potentially
habitable.
Same is true for planet F. It's almost
an Earth twin. The mass, the radius, the
surface gravity are all just like Earth.
baseline temperature without any
greenhouse effect 217 Kelvin minus 55C.
In fact for Earth that corresponding
figure would be 40C if we did not have
an atmosphere. So if this has an
atmosphere with a greenhouse effect, it
could bring that up to uh a nice sort of
above freezing temperature and again
could well have a liquid water ocean as
shown in the uh artist's impression at
the top there.
Planet G, well also a little bit bigger
than the Earth, a little bit more
massive. Density suggests rocky at 5 g
per cubic cm. gravity very similar
baseline temperature a bit cooler now
minus 73 C 200 Kelvin and again boost
that with a greenhouse effect have to
have quite a thick atmosphere to make
this uh capable of supporting liquid
water but the Hubble Space Telescope did
detect water in 2017 but that was
probably water in the atmosphere rather
than on the surface as liquid. So, this
is probably water vapor in a thin
atmosphere. And it's going to be
fascinating because I think we're going
to learn a lot more about these planets
as the James Web telescope turns its
attention to all of these individually.
Finally, Trappist 1H. Well, it's a
little bit smaller. 33% the mass, 3/4 of
the diameter. Um and the uh surface
gravity well 103% that of the earth. Um
now this is beyond the habitable zone.
It's only getting 13% of the heat. And
so this is going to mean that even with
a bit of atmospheric boost, we're
talking about an ice world with
conditions similar to those uh right at
the south pole of the earth over the
whole planet.
So there's a a whole gradation of these
planets and of course the thing that
everyone is interested in is whether or
not any of these have life. And the
statement I think has to be that it
might be possible with Trappist 1E
perhaps being the best candidate. Maybe
D, maybe F, maybe all three of them. But
there's a number of factors to think
about that are going to affect all of
this.
These planets are in an orbital
resonance with each other very similar
to the way that the moons of Jupiter in
are in orbital resonance. And there's
they're also very close to each other.
And so there are likely to be
significant tidal interactions both with
each other and with the star. And so
that is going to affect things. have
already said that planet B is probably
going to be getting squeezed and
stretched enough to cause huge amounts
of vulcanism uh making it extremely
unpleasant as with Io at Jupiter.
We've got the fact that the star is
putting out heat energy, infrared
radiation, but very little light indeed.
So very dim in the optical part, not
much chance really of photosynthesis.
Uh the visible photons are used by
plants because they carry enough energy
to allow the plants to extract the
energy by photosynthesis and do useful
chemistry. And infrared photons really
aren't very good for that. They don't
carry enough oomph.
But that doesn't mean that you couldn't
derive your energy as many bacterial
species do on Earth from a chemotrophic
source. They use the pure chemistry of
the rocks, the iron and the sulfur in
rocks and combining those with each
other andor with native hydrogen to
extract energy. Rather than getting it
from a a light source, they get it from
a chemical source. Uh it also means
perhaps that any creatures running
around on the surface are likely to be
blind. Uh what would be the point of
evolving eyes when your planet even at
planet D is so dim uh as to really not
do you very much good at all? Um of
course any vision is better than none
and we're being very parochial. Maybe
they found a way to do all of these
things with the uh abundant infrared
radiation.
The other factor with these red dwarf
stars is that they do have a nasty habit
of erupting with significant stellar
flares. And those flares can pump out a
lot of harmful radiation, a lot of
ultraviolet light, x-rays even. Um, and
that's obviously bad for any life. So,
you are going to need some protection.
Now, an atmosphere will protect you for
a while, but it will get ablated by it,
will get blasted away into space, and
you're better off actually having a
magnetic field. And uh a magnetic field
usually means a conducting iron core,
which most of these planets probably
have being rocky planets, and rotating
at a reasonable rate, which we don't
know.
And it's quite possible that their
rotation is tidily locked. Jumping to
the last point there,
such that they keep one face towards the
star, certainly for the innermost ones.
And that might change things because it
might mean that you have a hot side and
a cold side. And unless you've got a
thick atmosphere like Venus to spread
the heat equally around everywhere, um
then maybe there's a temperate zone on
or near the dayight boundary. So
conditions could vary quite
significantly across the face of the
planets. So again, until we understand
whether these are tidily locked or in
some other strange rotational situation,
there are a number of unknowns that uh
could affect things.
The other factor I mentioned that it
takes two billion years for a star like
Trappist one to calm down from its
formation into its stable main sequence
state. The protostar phase and as it
does that it's likely to be very much
more active with flares may take a long
time to calm down to a even reasonably
sustainable rate. And so conditions near
to the star can be very bad for an
extended period of time during that
early stage. That probably happened in
the solar system for the first 50, 100,
150 million years of the existence of
the earth. Um but of course at that
stage the earth was probably a ball of
molten lava anyway from its formation
phase. um and so didn't have liquid
water oceans. Those were all delivered
later by subsequent asteroid and comet
impacts and other methods
and so it became habitable and by then
the sun had calmed down anyway. But the
balance of things here may be different.
And it could be that the water is
delivered during those first two billion
years. But the star is so uh rowdy that
um it uh doesn't really bode well for
the early evolutionary phases of life
and maybe the water gets blasted away. I
think a lot depends on the magnetic
field and the rotation which we just
don't know.
But there's another factor. We have some
evidence that the seeds of life can be
delivered to uh nent planet by falling
out of the sky. We have samples from the
asteroid Bennu here on Earth that we
collected with the Osiris Rex mission
that revealed the presence not only of
20 different amino acids, but all the
building blocks of DNA, the AC TG, and
even the U of RNA, the nucleotide bases
in the material from Bennu. And so if
organic chemicals like that can form on
small bodies and in space dust and so
forth and then rain out on the planet,
well, it's going to rain out on all
these planets as well. And so it's
entirely possible that the seeds of life
were present on all of them. And they're
so close together that impacts and
ejector hurling from one planet can so
easily get transferred to another
planet. I have a piece of Mars in my
meteorite collection that was blasted
off the surface of Mars long time ago
and fell to Earth. And if that happened,
then perhaps bits of Earth have also
landed on Mars and each planet has
thoroughly contaminated the other as a
result. So maybe if life could get a tow
hold, I don't know, on planet G or even
planet H farther from the star during
the early phases, it could rockhop from
one to another as the star calmed down.
So there are possibilities here. And
well, I just hope we get to find out
while I'm still around to uh know the
answer. I'd be absolutely fascinated.
So, how about spending your time on a
cruise interstellar going and visiting
or even just sending a rocket space
probe to go and have a look? Well, 40
light years is a long way. It is too far
for any rocket technology that we have
today. Even our fastest space probes
would take hundreds of thousands of
years to get that far. So, that's not
really plausible. the Breakthrough
Starshot project where they're going to
use a laser on Earth to power a little
tiny
uh star chip spacecraft with a solar
sail or a laser sail to try and
accelerate to a goodly fraction of the
speed of light. That's would still take
200 years to do the distance. Um and
then we'd need another 40 to get the uh
signal to come home. So again this is
really too far for this sort of
exploration in any technology that we
have uh or even have dreamt of
reasonable chance of building in the
next 50 years or so.
So we've got to look at these planets
remotely and of course we can do our
search for extraterrestrial intelligence
the SETI approach looking for laser
signals, radio signals, light uh
anything that we uh can detect and
trying to determine whether there is
anything abnormal about it that doesn't
have a natural origin but is artificial
in nature. And so far nothing. A couple
of major searches of Trappist one were
done in 2017 and 2024 and we haven't
found anything there. But then we
haven't found anything else anywhere
else either. So it just may be that uh
we are alone or that we are not looking
in the right way or that our technology
is not up to it yet or that uh these uh
civilizations are just not putting out
signals anywhere that we happen to have
looked. But in 2,000 years time the such
as the wobble of the path of the earth
around the sun that we will become a
transiting planet as viewed from
trappist one. Any astronomers on any of
those planets looking back towards the
sun will see dips in the light curve
once a year caused by the Earth passing
in front of Soul. And they will be able
to infer the existence of the planet
Earth and see that it is just like their
home world perhaps. And maybe they will
turn powerful telescopes to us, radio
telescopes, and be able to pick up
evidence that we are there. So maybe
they will find us before we find them.
Wouldn't that be interesting?
And I'll just finish with this little
poster that was produced of uh the
potential for people planet hopping on a
cruise in some sort of starship and
going and uh visiting Trappist one and
looking out the window and in wonder at
the amazing worlds of the Trappist
system. So, thanks very much for
listening and I hope you've enjoyed that
one. Bye for now.